+++
title = 'Collaborative Workflows for Academic Publishing'
date = 2023-11-04
draft = true
+++

## Introduction

Communication of your research to others is a core component of life in academia. This is done through lectures, workshops, and most notably: papers. It is therefore highly beneficial to develop effective practices for publishing your results via papers.

We identify several requirements for a competent publication workflow.

- *easy collaboration with others*
- *flexible output formats*
- *integration with a reference manager*
- *version control*

Below, we propose two opposing solutions that meet these requirements, and suggest a middle ground.

## Collaborative Workflows are *Simple*

This workflow aims to follow one guiding principle:

> Mininize friction by keeping the technical barrier low

In this end of the spectrum, we aim to use tools most non-technical users would already be familiar with. This sacrifices flexibility and control available in more dedicated tools, instead aiming for a simpler user experience.

## Microsoft Word

Like it or not, MS Word is by far the most used writing tool. It has embedded its way into universities and industry alike. It makes it compatively easy to generate professional-looking documents with minimal configuration, and is well integrated with other Microsoft 365 products.

## Cloud Storage Provider

- box, google drive, onedrive, etc.
- most of these implement some kind of version control

## Zotero

- reference manager
- let one person handle the citations with their own zotero library
- let others link their documents

## A Robust Workflow for Scholarly Publishing

> "learn the right tools for the job (change this later, aerith)"

Scholarship is a collaborative and iterative process, where small changes build up over time to create a final product. Further, we should strive to make our research process as open and transparent as possible. The workflow I propose as a solution to these problems is a workflow that prioritizes open source tools, version control, and reproducibility.  

This article describes a collaborative scholarly workflow for digital-first publishing. There are several elements of this workflow, below is a list of how they fit together.

- File Format: Markdown
- Version Control: Git
- Hosting: GitHub
- Citation Management: Zotero
- Text Editor: VS Code
- Conversion: Pandoc

## "Quick" Start

### Software Downloads

1. Zotero
   1. Better BibTex - Zotero plugin that allows for better citation management
2. VSCode
   1. Pandoc Citer - VSCode Extension that will allow us to cite in Markdown easily
   2. Pandoc Render - VSCode extension that allows for a reproducible pandoc rendering command, will allow for a faster way to render documents

#### Creating a new project

1. Create a new repository on GitHub
2. Clone the empty repository to your local machine
3. Create a folder for each author on the project such that the folder structure looks like this:

```
project
├── author1
│   ├── author1_content.md
├── author2
│   ├── author2_content.md
```

#### Autoexporting .bib file

1. Create a .bib file in the root directory of your project
2. Configure Better BibTex to export to this .bib file
3. Enable automatic export

Now you can add citations from the zotero browser plugin, and they will automatically be added to your .bib file.

Now, if you are author1, your folder structure should look like this:

```
project
├── author1
│   ├── author1_content.md
│   ├── author1.bib
├── author2
│   ├── author2_content.md
```

Author2 will set up their own sources on their own machine, and will have their own .bib file.

#### Setting up VSCode

Now, we want to start writing, to do this, open VSCode.

#### Setting up Zotero and Better Bibtex

Follow the instructions for installing Better Bibtex here: [Link](https://retorque.re/zotero-better-bibtex/installation/)




Open the pandoc citer settings, and have the .bib file point to wherever your .bib file is stored.

### Zotero Setup

1. Install Zotero
2. Create a new library for your project
3. Install the Better BibTex plugin
4. Configure Better BibTex to export to a .bib file in your project's root directory, enable automatic export
5. Add a .csl file to your project's root directory

### Extension Setup

1. Install the Pandoc Citer extension
2. Configure the extension to use the .bib and .csl files in your project's root directory
3. Configure the extension to use the citation style you want
4. Configure the extension to use the citation key format you want

### Workspace Setup

You can use an automation script that I created in bash for you to set up your workspaces. You can find it here: [Link](https://github.com/aerithnetzer/auto-scholar)

- Something like google docs is not a good solution because it does not allow for blame.

## Can you have both?

- indermediate solution combining markdown/docx
